=head1 TPR-BOOK

The Turbo Pascal Reference by Ed Mitchell

First edition, Nov 1992. (C) Copyright 1992 by Ed Mitchell, author of the
Borland Pascal Developer's Guide, Que Corporation, 1992.

=head1 CHAPTER 1 - A Freeware Book

Chapter 1 - Part 1 of 3 parts - of the Turbo Pascal Reference

=head2 Introduction

Welcome to the electronic edition of the Turbo Pascal Reference. This reference
provides approximately 400 single-spaced pages of reference information about
the Turbo Pascal IDE, the Turbo Pascal language, all of the System and Graph
libraries, plus a comprehensive 150+ page reference to Turbo Vision.

This book is intended to be used as a reference - not as a tutorial. If you
have no programming experience whatsoever, you should consult a Turbo Pascal
programming tutorial first. If you have a minor amount of programming
experience, you will find a complete discussion of Turbo Pascal in Chapter 3,
"The Turbo Pascal Language".

The Turbo Vision Reference section, Chapters 6 through 10, is unique in that it
provides many examples and highlights the most commonly used features. If you
have programmed in Turbo Vision you already know that you do not need to use
all of the methods described for each object type. Unfortunately, it is
difficult, using Borland's documentation, to discern those that are needed and
those that you can safely ignore. This means that learning Turbo Vision using
the Borland documentation is much more difficult than it needs to be. And that
is why you will want to use the reference information I've provided in this
freeware book.

If you have never programmed in Turbo Vision, I recommend that you consult
Chapter 11, "Turbo Vision Tutorial", continuing though Chapter 16, of the
Borland Pascal Developer's Guide, published by Que Books.

This Turbo Pascal Reference, a 400 page book, is available to you, for free.
Subject to the copyright and distribution rights described below, you are free
to copy this book and give it to others.

=head2 Why am I giving this book away?

When I wrote Borland Pascal Developer's Guide (Que Books, 1992), my publisher
asked for a comprehensive book that would cover every feature of Turbo Pascal.
Obviously, such a volume would take a lot more than could fit within the
approximately 1,000 page limitation of a printed book.

Because there is not room in a single volume to hold all of this material, I am
giving away the extra 400 pages that it takes to flesh out the entire topic. I
want you, my reader, to have access to this text, to help you in your
development of Pascal applications. There is a great deal of valuable insight,
tutorials and sample code within this text and I very much want these
techniques to get into your hands and to be used by you.

Please note that while the material presented here complements the Borland
Pascal Developer's Guide, this electronic book is not in any way affiliated
with the Que Corporation.

This electronic book is completely free. However, if you find this information
of value to you, I would greatly appreciate your purchase of Borland Pascal
Developer's Guide, published by Que Corporation, 1992. (Or, alternately, my
Secrets of the Borland C++ Masters (Sams Books, 1992) or Using Microsoft C/C++
(Que, 1992)).

This freeware book does not duplicate the material in the Borland Pascal
Developer's Guide. The Borland Pascal Developer's Guide and the Turbo Pascal
Reference are completely independent of one another - yet strongly complement
each other - so it is to your advantage to have access to both. If your book
store does not stock Borland Pascal Developer's Guide, you can ask your
retailer to order them directly from Que Corporation, or call Que at
317-573-2500 or 1-800-428-5331.

Because the material in the Turbo Pascal Reference was originally intended as
extra chapters in the Borland Pascal Developer's Guide, you will find cross
references to the Developer's Guide. For example, in the reference section on
the Turbo Vision TCollection object, I will point you to chapter 14,
"Collections" in the Borland Pascal Developer's Guide for additional examples.

=head2 About the Author

I am the author of Borland Pascal Developer's Guide (Que Books, 1992), coauthor
of Using Microsoft C/C++ 7.0 (Que Books, 1992), Secrets of the Borland C++
Masters (Sams Books, 1992), and author of, under a pseudonym, Software
Construction Set for the IBM PC (Hayden Books, 1984).

As a past employee of Software Publishing Corporation, I was the project
manager of the best selling PFS First Choice integrated software product, and
coauthor of the original PFS Write which was one of the first word processors
for the IBM PC (and was also a best seller). Both PFS Write and PFS First
Choice were written in Pascal. In the case of First Choice, the source ran to
over 125,000 lines of Pascal code. I've been writing Pascal code since my first
use of an LSI-II Terak Microcomputer in 1978.

=head2 How to Contact the Author

You can contact me via electronic mail to Compuserve 73317,2513 or via the
Internet to 73317.2513@compuserve.com. I promise to read all mail that I
receive; realistically I cannot promise to respond to all enquiries.

=head2 Copyright Notice

This text is copyrighted, which means that I retain ownership and control over
the right to make copies of this electronic book. However, I give you
permission to copy this electronic text and give it away, free, to others,
subject to the following rules and restrictions:

=over 4

=item 1. 
This electronic book may only be copied in its entirety, unless
separate permission is received from the author.

=item 2. 
Each copy of this material, whether electronic or printed, must not be
modified by you. In particular, each copy must include this introduction, my
copyright statement and the reference to Borland Pascal Developer's Guide (Que,
1992).

=item 3. 
You may print out copies of this electronic text for your own use.

=item 4. 
Teachers and instructors are encouraged to copy, or to print and use
this material in their classroom; however, if material is extracted for use in
a classroom setting, the extracted material must bear the following notice:

    From Turbo Pascal Reference, (C) Copyright 1992 by Ed
    Mitchell, author of Borland Pascal Developer's Guide, Que
    Corporation, 1992.

=item 5. 
Bona fide shareware distributors may charge a "nominal" fee for the
costs of duplication and distribution. By "nominal", I mean a low fee such as
$5.00 per disk.

=item 6. 
You may not sell copies of the Turbo Pascal Reference in electronic,
printed or any other form, for profit or not-for profit.

=item 7. 
You may not give this material away or distribute this freeware text
as a promotion for any other product without the express written permission of
Ed Mitchell.

=item 8. 
Turbo Pascal, Turbo Pascal for Windows, and Borland Pascal are
trademarks of Borland International, Inc.

=back

=head2 Disclaimer: There are No Warranties

The material in this electronic book has not been professionally edited. In
particular, Turbo Pascal Reference is not produced by nor sanctioned by the Que
Corporation. Que Corporation has no affiliation with nor responsibility for the
content of Turbo Pascal Reference. Ed Mitchell is solely responsible for the
content of Turbo Pascal Reference.

This means that the text has NOT been reviewed by one or more copy editors and
a technical editor, which is typical of the material that you read in a
published book. As such, you may find typographical or grammatical errors.
There may also be technical errors of the type that crop up during any big
project as large as this one. If you find a problem, please notify me directly,
via electronic mail, and I will fix the problem for a subsequent release of
this electronic book.

The text and sample programs are intended solely for educational purposes.
While the programs are believed to reasonably accurate and functional, they
have not been subjected to the standards of a professional software quality
assurance department. No warranties, expressed or implied, are given. This
material is used by you "as is". You may use the sample code in your own
applications but you must subject the sample code to the same testing that you
would give to your own code.

=head2 About Borland Pascal Developer's Guide

The Borland Pascal Developer's Guide is aimed at the intermediate to advanced
Pascal programmer, although it contains an enormous amount of information that
will be of value to those who have just learned Turbo Pascal. The Guide covers
Turbo Pascal 6.0, Turbo Pascal 7.0, Borland Pascal, including the new
protected-mode features, and Turbo Pascal for Windows. The book includes a
companion disk containing all of the source code from the book, plus several
shareware utilities. A detailed outline of the Borland Pascal Developer's Guide
is presented after the Table of Contents for the Turbo Pascal Reference.

=head2 About the Illustrations and Sample Source Code

In some of the chapters you will see reference to "figures", such as "Figure
3.2". Above the Figure caption you will see a notation similar to:

    ***03tpr02.pcx***

This notation means that the illustration is contained in "pcx" format graphics
file named 03TPR02.PCX. You can read and print .pcx files using the Microsoft
PaintBrush program that comes with Microsoft Windows. Many other graphics
programs can also display and print these .pcx format files. All of the .pcx
files are included in this electronic book.

The text contains many program listings. Some of these are also provided as
separate source code files to make it easy for you to use the sample code in
your own programs. Whenever you see a listing in the text that contains "line
numbers" on the left hand side, the topmost line of the listing will show the
name of the file containing the source code. The sample files are included in
this electronic book. The line numbers are for reference only; if you choose to
type in any of the sample programs, do not type the line numbers.
