=head1 TPR-BOOK

This material is used under the Fair Use doctrine for educational and 
non-commercial purposes. The original text is copyrighted, and all rights are 
retained by the author. The material is provided "as is" without warranty of 
any kind. 

Please note the following preliminary remark from Ed Mitchell:

    This chapter is part of the Turbo Pascal Reference electronic freeware book 
    (C) Copyright 1992 by Ed Mitchell. 

    This freeware book contains supplementary material to Borland Pascal 
    Developer's Guide, published by Que Corporation, 1992. 
    
    However, Que Corporation has no affiliation with nor responsibility for the 
    content of this free book. 
    
    Please see Chapter 1 of the Turbo Pascal Reference for important information
    about your right to distribute and use this material freely. 
    
    If you find this material of use, I would appreciate your purchase of one my
    books, such as the Borland Pascal Developer's Guide or Secrets of the 
    Borland C++ Masters, Sams Books, 1992. 
    
    Thank you.

=head1 CHAPTER 9 - The Turbo Vision Reference (continue)

Chapter 9 of the Turbo Pascal Reference

For additional information on using Turbo Vision, including a detailed
tutorial, please see Chapters 11 through 16 of the Borland Pascal Developer's
Guide.

=head2 TFrame

    .------------------+-------------------------------------------------------.
    | class            | TV::Views::Frame                                      |
    +------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
    | parents          | TV::Views::View                                       |
    | classes          | TV::Objects::Object                                   |
    +------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
    | methods          | BUILD()                                               |
    |                  | TFrame()                                              |
    |                  | dragWindow()                                          |
    |                  | draw()                                                |
    |                  | frameLine()                                           |
    |                  | getPalette()                                          |
    |                  | handleEvent()                                         |
    |                  | name()                                                |
    |                  | new_TFrame()                                          |
    |                  | setState()                                            |
    '------------------+-------------------------------------------------------'

=head3 Turbo Vision Hierarchy

    TObject
        TView
            TFrame

=head3 Discussion

TFrame objects, like many of the objects in Turbo Vision, are automatically
managed by Turbo Vision and you will rarely need to instantiate, let
alone, directly access any of its methods.  The TFrame object defines the
border or "frame" that wraps around each window and is automatically
created by TWindow.Init which calls TWindow.InitFrame.

=head3 Fields

None

=head3 Methods

=head4 new

    my $frame = TFrame->new(bounds => $bounds);

Creates a new L</TFrame> object having the size and location specified by
Bounds.  This method is called by TWindow->initFrame.

B<See>: TWindow->initFrame

=head4 draw

    $self->draw();

This method draws the frame, adding the owner's Title string, and the
appropriate icons such as the close box, the zoom icon and the resize
icon, as specified by the inherited TView->state flags.

=head4 getPalette

    my $palette = $self->getPalette();

Returns a TPalette object to the default palette cpFrame.  In the unlikely event
that you need to change a L</TFrame>'s color, you need to override
TWindow->initFrame to instantiate a new, TFrame-derived object with an
overridden L</getPalette>.  The overridden L</getPalette> then returns a 
TPalette  object to the modified color palette mapping.  You need to go through 
this indirect approach of overriding both TWindow->initFrame and creating a new
TFrame-type object because L</TFrame> is normally used only internally to
Turbo Vision.  Hence, you must override the routine in TWindow that
actually instantiates the L</TFrame>.  You can see an example of this type of
operation in the description of TBackground.

=head4 handleEvent

    $self->handleEvent($event);

Calls TView->handleEvent for general event processing, and then processes
events for the L</TFrame> icons.

=head4 setState

    $self->setState($aState, $enable);

TFrame->setState passes its parameters to TView->setState, and then checks
TView->state to see if either C<sfActive> or C<sfDragging> are set.  If these
bits are set, then TFrame->setState calls TView->drawView.

=head2 TGroup

    .------------------+-------------------------------------------------------.
    | class            | TV::Views::Group                                      |
    +------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
    | parents          | TV::Views::View                                       |
    | classes          | TV::Objects::Object                                   |
    +------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
    | methods          | BUILD()                                               |
    |                  | DEMOLISH()                                            |
    |                  | TGroup()                                              |
    |                  | at()                                                  |
    |                  | awaken()                                              |
    |                  | buffer()                                              |
    |                  | changeBounds()                                        |
    |                  | clip()                                                |
    |                  | current()                                             |
    |                  | dataSize()                                            |
    |                  | draw()                                                |
    |                  | drawSubViews()                                        |
    |                  | endModal()                                            |
    |                  | eventError()                                          |
    |                  | execView()                                            |
    |                  | execute()                                             |
    |                  | first()                                               |
    |                  | firstMatch()                                          |
    |                  | firstThat()                                           |
    |                  | focusNext()                                           |
    |                  | forEach()                                             |
    |                  | freeBuffer()                                          |
    |                  | getBuffer()                                           |
    |                  | getData()                                             |
    |                  | getHelpCtx()                                          |
    |                  | handleEvent()                                         |
    |                  | indexOf()                                             |
    |                  | insert()                                              |
    |                  | insertBefore()                                        |
    |                  | insertView()                                          |
    |                  | last()                                                |
    |                  | lock()                                                |
    |                  | matches()                                             |
    |                  | name()                                                |
    |                  | new_TGroup()                                          |
    |                  | redraw()                                              |
    |                  | remove()                                              |
    |                  | removeView()                                          |
    |                  | resetCurrent()                                        |
    |                  | resetCursor()                                         |
    |                  | selectNext()                                          |
    |                  | setCurrent()                                          |
    |                  | setData()                                             |
    |                  | setState()                                            |
    |                  | shutDown()                                            |
    |                  | unlock()                                              |
    |                  | valid()                                               |
    '------------------+-------------------------------------------------------'

=head3 Turbo Vision Hierarchy

    TObject
        TView
            TGroup
                TWindow
                    TDialog
                TDeskTop
                TProgram

=head3 Discussion

The L</TGroup> object manages groups of objects, all of which are descended
from TView.  In effect, L</TGroup> keeps track of a group of subviews, such as
multiple windows on the desktop, or all of the controls within a dialog. 
L</TGroup> provides the functionality to manipulate the grouped views as if
they were a single view, although L</TGroup> itself, surprisingly, is an
invisible view.  That's because each of the subviews contained within a
group defines the group itself.  For example, a TDialog contains a window,
a frame, a dialog interior and a collection of controls such as input
lines, checkboxes and buttons.  The TDialog object is the manager of these
dialog box components and is actually invisible.  When TDialog->draw is
called to draw itself on the screen, it doesn't actually draw anything; 
instead, TDialog->draw calls each of the subview's L</draw> methods (the
window, the frame, the buttons and so on).

=head3 Commonly Used Features

For most applications you will use only a few of the methods provided by
L</TGroup>, including the L</new> constructor (via the subview's inherited new
methods), L</execView> to execute a modal dialog box, L</insert> to add a 
subview to the group, and L</getData> and L</setData> to read and write the data
fields of the owned views (particularly for dialogs).   L</TGroup> is an 
internal object used to support other Turbo Vision objects (such as TWindow or 
TDialog), and the remaining methods are used to implement their specific
functionality.  It is unlikely that you will need to instantiate a L</TGroup>
directly.

=head3 Example

B<See>: TApplication, TDeskTop, TDialog, TWindow

=head3 Fields

=head4 buffer

    has buffer => ( is => 'ro', isa => ArrayRef );

When caching of views is in effect, the contents of the group of views is
stored in a temporary cache buffer to speed up screen redrawing.  L</buffer>
refer to an array used for caching, or is C<undef> if no cache buffer
has been defined.

B<See>: TGroup->draw, TGroup->lock, TGroup->unlock

=head4 current

    has current => ( is => 'ro', isa => TView );

Is a weaken reference to the currently selected view (the view whose I<select>
method has been called). 

B<See>: TView->select, Chapters 16 and 18.

=head4 last

    has last => ( is => 'ro', isa => TView );

L</last> is a reference to the subview that is on the bottom of the Z-ordered
list of views.  Each view contains a TView->next reference that points to the
next view in the list.

=head4 phase

    has phase => ( is => 'ro', isa => Int, default => sub { phFocused } );

Subviews can examine this field to determine at which phase (C<phFocused>, 
C<phPreProcess>, C<phPostProcess>) in the event processing their L</handleEvent>
method was called.  See Chapter 13, "More Turbo Vision Features" in the Borland
Pascal Developer's Guide for a more in depth discussion of phased event 
processing.

=head3 Methods

=head4 new

    my $group = TGroup->new(bounds => $bounds);

TGroup's new method calls TView->BUILD, and sets the TView->options variable
to C<ofSelectable> and C<ofBuffered>.  The latter option enables cache buffering
of the view's L</draw> output, if sufficient memory is available.  TView's
I<eventMask> field is set to 0xFFFF which causes this view (or group) to
respond to all classes of events.

=head4 DESTROY

    $self->DESTROY();

Call L</DESTROY> to cleanup of the group and its contents.  L</DESTROY> first 
I<hides> the group and then calls I<destroy> for each view's, and finally 
cleanup of itself.

=head4 changeBounds

    $self->changeBounds($bounds);

I<Override>: Never

A group is resized or moved by calling L</changeBounds>, which, in turn, calls
TView->calcBounds to recalculate new boundaries for its subviews, and then
L</changeBounds> to reposition the subviews.  These calls are made for every
subview in the group.

=head4 dataSize

    my $int = dataSize();

Calls each subview's L</dataSize> method and creates a total data size value
for the entire group.  This method is normally used in conjunction with
L</getData> and L</setData> for retrieiving specific field values.

=head4 draw

    $self->draw();

If L</buffer> is C<undef>, then TGroup->draw calls each subview's L</draw> 
method.  If L</buffer> is not C<undef>, then L</draw> calls TView->writeBuf to 
copy the cached view image to the screen. 

B<See>: TGroup->buffer

=head4 endModal

    $self->endModal($command);

I<Override>: Never

When the currently active dialog, for instance, that has been placed on
the screen with the TGroup->execView method, it is the current modal view. 
A call to this procedure terminates the modal nature of the view and
passes the Command value to L</execView>, which in turn, returns $command to
the caller.  If a group is not currently a modal view, TGroup->endModal
calls TView->endModal which has approximately the same result, causing
L</execView> to return $command to its caller.

B<See>: TView->endModal

=head4 eventError

    $self->eventError($event);

If TGroup.Execute encounters an event that it cannot handle, it first
calls TGroup.EventError, which attempts to call its owner's EventError
method.  You can override this method to intercept errors, if needed.

=head4 execView

    my $int = $self->execView();

Besides L</new>, L</DESTROY> and L</insert>, this is one of the most commonly 
used methods in a L</TGroup> object.  Call L</execView> to display a modal view, 
such as a dialog box, on the screen.  When a modal view is on the screen, all
events are handled by the modal view.  You can not, for instance, make
menu selections or press short cut keys to activate non-dialog box
functions.  You must first terminate the modal dialog before resuming
regular program operation.  L</execView> returns the command code that caused
the view to complete.  This might be C<cmOk>, C<cmCancel> or some other code
that you have defined as part of the dialog definition.

B<See>: TGroup->insert, Chapter 12

=head4 execute

    my $int = $self->execute();

L</execute> is the TGroup's main event processing loop, fetching events and
then calling L</handleEvent> to process each event.  The loop is terminated
when a view calls L</endModal>.  L</execute> returns the command code that 
caused the termination, and that is passed to L</execView> for return to the 
caller.

B<See>: TGroup->endModal, TGroup->handleEvent

=head4 first

    my $view | undef = $self->first();

Returns a reference to the subview within the group that is currently "on
top" or closest to the screen.  If, for some reason, this is called when
the group has no subviews, L</first> returns C<undef>.

=head4 firstThat

    my $view | undef = $self->firstThat(\&Test, $arg | undef);

$Test is a code reference to a sub having one reference parameter and
returning either C<TRUE> or C<FALSE>.  This iterator sub operates
identically to the TCollection->firstThat iterator, except that
TGroup->firstThat scans through the list of subviews within the group, in
Z-order (see Chapter 13, "More Turbo Vision Features".)

B<See>: Chapter 14, "Collections", TCollection->firstThat

=head4 forEach

    $self->forEach(\&action, $arg | undef);

$action is a code reference to a sub having one reference (or TView)
parameter.  L</forEach> scans through the subviews in Z-order, and for each
subview it calls the $action sub with a reference to the subview. 
TGroup->forEach operates similarly to TCollection->forEach, except that you
should normally call TGroup->lock prior to calling TGroup->forEach, and
TGroup->unlock after calling L</forEach>.  This is particularly important when
the L</forEach> iterator is used such that each subview is redrawn on the
screen and L</TGroup> is using a cache L</buffer>.  Lock causes subsequent 
screen writes to go only to the cache L</buffer>, and L</unlock> then copies the
entire L</buffer> to the screen.  If you do not use L</lock>/L</unlock>, each of
the subviews will repaint on the screen individually, causing a potentially 
annoying visual effect.

B<See>: Chapter 14, "Collections", TGroup->buffer, TGroup->lock, TGroup->unlock

=head4 getData

    $self->getData(\@rec);

Calls each subview's L</getData> method in reverse Z-order, copy each
subview's data to the $rec variable.  After calling each subview's L</getData>
method, L</getData> adds the subview's L</dataSize> value to $rec so that $rec
now referees past the data it just copied, making it ready to read the next
subview's data.

B<See>: TView->dataSize, TGroup->setData

=head4 getHelpCtx

    my $int = $self->getHelpCtx();

Calls the currently selected subview's L</getHelpCtx> to return the subview's
context sensitive help index.  If the subview doesn't have any context
sensitive help, then L</getHelpCtx> returns the value of the help context for
the entire L</TGroup>.

=head4 handleEvent

    $self->handleEvent($event);

The TGroup-handleEvent method passes most events onto the appropriate
subview's L</handleEvent> method according to whether the event is a focused
event, positional event or broadcast event.  See Chapters 12 and 13 in the
Borland Pascal Developer's Guide for a detailed description of event
processing.

=head4 insert

    $self->insert($p);

Use L</insert> to place a non-modal view into the group.  For example, 
L</insert> is used to place windows onto the TDeskTop group object, as well as 
all of the individual controls within a dialog object.

B<See>: TGroup->execView, TGroup->insertBefore

=head4 insertBefore

    $self->insertBefore($p, $Target | undef);

L</insertBefore> enables you to insert a view at any location within an
existing group.  The view $p becomes inserted before (in Z-Order) the view
specified by $Target.  If $Target is C<undef>, then $p is inserted at the very
back of the view, furthest from the screen.

=head4 lock

    $self->lock();

When using the cache L</buffer> to speed up screen output, setting L</lock>
prevents the L</buffer> contents from being written to the screen.  This way,
multiple items or views can be written to the L</buffer> without causing
annoying flicker, and then by calling L</unlock>, the entire L</buffer> is 
copied to the screen in one operation.  L</lock> operates by incrementing a lock
counter each time that it is called.  L</unlock> decrements the counter and
once the counter reaches zero, copies the L</buffer> to the screen.

B<Important>: L</lock> and L</unlock> must always be called in matched pairs to
avoid leaving the L</buffer> in a locked state.  If that happens, no output
will be sent to the screen.

B<See>: TGroup->forEach, TGroup->unlock

=head4 redraw

    $self->redraw();

L</redraw> forces an actual screen draw to occur, rather than merely copying
from the cache L</buffer>.  Otherwise, L</redraw> is the same as TGroup->draw.

=head4 remove

  $self->remove($p|undef);

Use L</remove> to delete a previously inserted view from a group.  For
example, if you have inserted a view, like this,

    $self->insert($dirWindow);
    
you delete the subview by calling,

    $self->remove($dirWindow);

=head4 selectNext

    $self->selectNext($forwards);

L</selectNext> complements the TView->select method for making a view the
focused view.   If  $forwards is C<TRUE>, then the next subview in Z-Order
from the currently selected view becomes the focused view.  If Forwards is
C<FALSE>, then L</selectNext> moves to the previous subview.

=head4 setData

    $self->setData(\@rec);

L</setData> is used in conjunction with L</getData> for accessing the data in 
the group.  L</setData> calls each subview's L</setData> method, copying data 
from $rec to the subviews.

=head4 setState

    $self->setState($aState, $enable);

TGroup->setState sets or clears the bits in each subview's I<state> field, to
accommodate setting focused, active, exposed or dragging bits within I<state>.

B<See>: TView->setState, C<sfXXXX> constants

=head4 unlock

    $self->unlock();

Unlocks a previously locked cache L</buffer> and copies the contents of the
L</buffer> to the screen.

B<See>: TGroup->locked

=head4 valid

    my $bool = $self->valid($command);

If all of the subview's L</valid> methods return C<TRUE>, then TGroup->valid
returns C<TRUE>, otherwise TGroup->valid returns C<FALSE>.  Since L</valid> is 
called when the L</execute> method is going to exit, a subview can retain 
control and prohbit the group from terminating by setting its L</valid> method 
to return C<FALSE>.

B<See>: TGroup->execute, TView->valid

=head2 THistory

class

=head3 Turbo Vision Hierarchy

    TObject
        TView
            THistory

=head3 Discussion

L</THistory> implements the history windows that display a down arrow icon on
the right hand side of dialog input fields.  Using L</THistory>, a history of
previously entered data is retained for future reference.  Each time you
enter a new value into an input field that is linked to a L</THistory> object,
the old value is stored away in a L</THistory> list.  Later, when you return
to the input field, you can press down arrow or click on the down arrow
icon to open a small list viewer showing your previous entries.  This
feature is especially useful in applications such as the Turbo Pascal IDE,
where you tend to refer back to files you have opened previously.  Hence,
the open file dialog contains a history of the files you have recently
opened.

The L</THistory> object is surprisingly easy to use considering the
functions that is provides.  All that needs to be done is to create the
object using its L</new> constructor and insert it into the dialog.  Data is
then automatically copied from the L</TInputLine> field to the L</THistory> and
back again, as appropriate.

It is not recommended that you attempt to override any of the
defined methods, except perhaps THistory->getPalette.  If you must override
any of the methods, you are strongly encouraged to view the Turbo Vision
source, available as a separate product from Borland.

=head3 Example

This short example demonstrates the use of the L</THistory> object in a
dialog, by modifying the TShell->configureData method of C<TVSHELL8> (and
example program shown in the Borland Pascal Developer's Guide), so that
the $editorName field now contains a L</THistory> list.  The variable $aHistory
is declared as a L</THistory> object.  In the original method, $editorName
is declared as a TView so it is recast to a L</TInputLine> for passing to the
THistory->new constructor.  To use L</THistory>, define a $bounds rectangle for
the L</THistory> icon, typically immediately to the right of the input field,
call the L</new> constructor, passing to it the location, a reference to the
linked input field, and a numeric value.  The numeric value (from 0 to
255) uniquely defines this L</THistory> list so that you could gain access to
it from other fields.  That means, more than one input field can reference
the same history list by always referencing the same history list number. 
Alternatively, you can use different history identification numbers for
each input field and have as many separate history lists as your
application requires.

    # Editor name
    $bounds->assign(18, 2, 50, 3);
    $editorName = TInputLine->new(bounds => $bounds, maxLen => $configNameSize);
    $self->insert($editorName);

    # Define the location for the THistory down arrow icon
    $bounds->assign(50, 2, 52, 3);
    $aHistory = THistory->new(
        bounds => $bounds, link => $editorName, historyId => 1);
    $self->insert($aHistory);
    
    $bounds->assign(2, 2, 15, 3);
    $self->insert(TLabel->new(
        bounds => $bounds, text => '~E~ditor name:',
        link => $editorName));

=head3 Fields

=head4 historyId

    has historyId => ( is => 'ro', isa => Int );

Contains the history list number assigned as the third parameter to the
new constructor.

=head4 link

    has link => ( is => 'ro', isa => TInputLine );

Refers to the input line field's L</TInputLine> object that is associated with
this history list.

=head3 Methods

=head4 new

    my $history = THistory->new(bounds => $bounds, link => $aLink, 
        historyId => $aHistoryId);

Creates the L</THistory> object, defining its location at $bounds, and linking
to the $aLink input field.  $aHistoryId is a number assigned by you to
uniquely identify this particular history list.   If you want, you can
initialize other L</THistory> objects that are linked to other input fields
using the same $aHistoryId number.  When the input fields have the same
$aHistoryId number, they will all share the same history list.

=head4 draw

    $self->draw();

Displays the icon representing the L</THistory> object, at the location
determined by the bounds parameter to new.

=head4 getPalette

    my $palette = $self->getPalette();

Returns a TPallette object to the C<cpHistory> color palette, which is intended 
for mapping onto the C<cpDialog> color palette.

=head2 THistoryViewer

class

=head3 Turbo Vision Hierarchy

    TObject
        TView
            TListViewer
                THistoryViewer

=head3 Discussion

L</THistoryViewer> manages the history list viewer that is displayed and owned
by L</THistory>.  Normally, you will access the L</THistory> object when you 
wish to use history lists in your applications, and will unlikely have any need
to directly use L</THistoryViewer>.

=head3 Fields

=head4 historyId

    has historyId => ( is => 'ro', isa => Int );

This contains the history identification number (see L</THistory>) selecting
which history list is to be displayed in the list box managed by
L</THistoryViewer>.

=head3 Methods

=head4 new

    my $historyViewer = THistoryViewer->new(bounds => $bounds, 
        hScrollBar => $aHScrollBar, vScrollBar => $aVScrollBar, 
        historyId => $aHistoryId);

Calls TListViewer->new to create a single column listbox with the
specified scroll bars, and links it to the L</THistory> specified by $aHistory.
Basically, when the L</THistory> object is made active by selecting its icon
or pressing the down arrow key, L</THistory> creates a L</THistoryWindow> object
by calling initHistoryWindow, and the L</THistoryWindow> object, in turn,
creates this L</TListViewer> object to display the history list and manage the
selections.

=head4 getPalette

    my $palette = $self->getPalette();

Returns a TPalette object of C<cpHistoryViewer>.

=head4 getText

    $self->getText(\$dest, $item, $maxLen);

L</getText> is the overridden L</TListViewer> method, implemented here to 
return the specific history list string indexed by $item, such that the returned
string is less than or equal to $maxLen in size.

B<See>: TListViewer->getText

=head4 handleEvent

    $self->handleEvent($event);

L</handleEvent> processes mouse double clicks and the Enter key for selecting
a file from the list box, and pressing the Esc key in order to cancel the
list box.

=head4 historyWidth

    my $int = $self->historyWidth();

Determines the longest string in the history list.

=head2 THistoryWindow

class

=head3 Turbo Vision Hierarchy

    TObject
        TView
            TGroup
                TWindow
                    THistoryWindow

=head3 Discussion

When the L</THistory> history list icon is selected, the L</THistory> object
creates a TWindow object in which to insert the L</THistoryViewer>. 
Therefore,the L</THistoryWindow> is primarily useful to the implementation of
L</THistory> and is not likely to be used directly by your programs.  See the
L</THistory> object for an example use of history lists.

=head3 Fields

=head4 viewer

    has viewer => ( is => 'rw', isa => TListViewer );

Contains a reference to the L</THistoryViewer> list box that is created by this
object.

=head3 Methods

=head4 new

    my $win = THistoryWindow->new(bounds => $bounds, historyId => $historyId);

Creates the L</THistoryWindow> by calling TWindow->BUILD and BUILDARGS with 
appropriate parameters, and then calls L</initViewer>.

=head4 getPalette

    my $palette = $self->getPalette();

Returns a TPalette object to C<cpHistoryWindow>, which is designed to map onto a
dialog palette.

=head4 getSelection

    $self->getSelection(\$dest);

Determines which list box item in the L</THistoryViewer> has the focus, and
returns that specific string in $dest.

=head4 initViewer

    my $listViewer = THistoryWindow->initViewer($historyId);

This is the class method that creates the L</THistoryViewer> list box.

=head2 TInputLine

class

=head3 Turbo Vision Hierarchy

    TObject
        TView
            TInputLine

=head3 Discussion

Use L</TInputLine> as an edit field in dialog boxes when you need to have the
user type in information such as a filename or other text.  L</TInputLine> is
a powerful single line editor, providing horizontal scrolling, line
editing, text selection and block deletion.  If the size of the input line
field is less than the maximum permitted length of the input, then
TInputLine will automatically provide left and right scrolling.

=head3 Commonly Used Methods and Fields

When L</TInputLine> is inserted into a dialog, you will generally use
only TInputLine->new to create the input field and will not likely have
use for any of the other methods or fields.  The L</TInputLine> will become
active when it receives the focus and will automatically process its input
via its HandleEvent method.

TInputLine processes string input however you could override
several of its methods in order to process other types of data.  For
instance, to handle numeric input, you would create a new
TInputLine-derived object and override TInputLine->valid to check for valid
numeric entries, and modify GetData to convert the entered string into a
numeric representation for processing.  You would also need to modify
SetData, and if you intend to use the object with streams, you'd need to
create new versions of Load and Store.

=head3 Example

This example shows instantiating a L</TInputLine> object having a maximum
input length of 40 character, and places within the rectangle defined by
C<(3, 3, 44, 4)>.  The L</TInputLine> object is then inserted into the dialog
group, and a L</TLabel> is attached as a prompt.  (See also L</TLabel>).  At the
completion of the $dialog setup, the $dialog will be displayed for editing
with  C<< $control = $deskTop->execView( $dialog ) >>;  Be sure to look at the
examples in the C<TVSHELL> program described in Chapters 11-12 of the Borland
Pascal Developer's Guide:

    with: for ( $dialog )
    {
        ...  
        # Add the Rename from this filename item
        $bounds->assign(3, 3, 44, 4);
        $oldFileName = TInputLine->new(bounds => $bounds, historyId => 40);
        $_->insert($oldFileName);
        $bounds->assign(2, 2, 44, 3);
        $_->insert( TLabel->new(bounds => $bounds, text => 'Rename this file:',
            link => $oldFileName ));
        ...
    } #/ with: for ( $dialog)


=head3 Fields

=head4 curPos

    has curPos => ( is => 'rw', isa => Int );

This field is used internally to keep track of the cursor's location
within the input field.

=head4 data

    has data => ( is => 'rw', isa => Str );

Contains the string that is being edited by the L</TInputLine>.

=head4 firstPos

    has firstPos => ( is => 'rw', isa => Int );

When horizontal scrolling is being used to display portions of the line
that do not fit within the specified bounds of the L</TInputLine>, L</firstPos>
contains the index of the first byte that appears at the left of the
field.

=head4 maxLen

    has maxLen => ( is => 'rw', isa => Int );

L</maxLen> contains the maximum number of characters for the line length, as
specified in the TInputLine->new constructor.

=head3 Methods

=head4 new

    my $inputLine = TInputLine->new(bounds => $bounds, maxLen => $aMaxLen, 
        | valid => $aValid);

Use TInputLine->new to create a new L</TInputLine> object located at the
position specified by $bounds (which specifies the length of the visible
data entry field) and $aMaxLen (which specifies the maximum length that the
entered string can become).

B<Note>: $bounds should describe a one line input field; if you specify a 
multi-line rectangle, L</TInputLine> will not behave correctly.

=head4 DESTROY

    $self->DESTROY();

Disposes of the fields used by L</TInputLine> and cleanup of the object.

=head4 dataSize

    $int = $self->dataSize();

L</getData> and L</setData> call L</dataSize> to determine how much space needs 
to be reserved for the data returned by L</TInputLine>.  Normally this is equal 
to L</maxLen> + 1, which is the maximum number of characters that can be 
entered, plus the length byte.

B<See>: TInputLine->getData, TInputLine->setData

=head4 draw

    $self->draw();

L</draw> takes care of displaying the input line text on the screen, adding
arrows when horizontal scrolling is in effect.

=head4 getData

    $self->getData(\@rec);

Copies the L</data> text string to $rec.

B<See>: TInputLine->dataSize, TInputLine->setData

=head4 getPalette

    my $palette = $self->getPalette();

Returns a TPalette object to the C<cpInputLine> color palette.  If you desire to
use a different color mapping, you should derive a new object from 
L</TInputLine> and override L</getPalette> as per the instructions in Chapter 
13, "More Turbo Vision Features", of the Borland Pascal Developer's Guide.

=head4 handleEvent

    $self->handleEvent($event);

When the input line is the focused event, TInputLine->handleEvent process
the mouse and editing keystroke events, including entering and selecting
text, horizontal scrolling and so on.

=head4 selectAll

    $self->selectAll($enable);

If $enable is C<TRUE>, L</selectAll> block selects the entire data input line 
and resets all the internal pointers (such as L</curPos> cursor location) to the
beginning of the string.  If $enable is C<FALSE>, all selection is turned off.
In both cases, the resultant input field is displayed on the screen by
calling the inherited TView->drawView.

=head4 setData

Copies the string value in $rec to L</data> and calls L</selectAll>.

B<See>: TInputLine->selectAll

=head4 setState

Calls TView->setState (See TView->setState for more information) and
performs additional processing for L</TInputLine>.

=head2 %ITEMS

variable

=head3 Declaration

    our %ITEMS = ();

=head3 Module

    TV::Objects::NSCollection

=head3 Purpose

This is an internal global variable used for maintaining the references
in all TCollection objects.

The TCollection items are stored as a reference in this variable; the keys are
determined with L<Hash::Util::FieldHash::id|Hash::Util::FieldHash>. 

B<See>: L<Scalar::Util::refaddr|Scalar::Util>.

=head2 TLabel

class

=head3 Turbo Vision Hierarchy

    TObject
        TView
            TStaticText
                TLabel

=head3 Discussion

L</TLabel> objects are similar to TStaticText in that they are typically used
to display a prompt line for dialog box controls such as an input field or
a group of radio buttons.  L</TLabel> objects differ from TStaticText only in
that they are explicitly linked to the control such that if you click with
the mouse to select the L</TLabel> object you actually select the attached
control.  Using this feature, you can use keyboard Alt-letter shortcut
keys to reach input fields and other controls in a dialog box.

=head3 Example

    # Create an input line field 40 spaces wide
    $bounds->assign(3, 3, 44, 4);
    $oldFileName = TInputLine->new(bounds => $bounds, historyId => 40);
    $_->insert($oldFileName);
    # Create a prompt label for the input field and link to the
    # $oldFileName inputLine field
    $bounds->assign(2, 2, 44, 3);
    $_->insert( TLabel->new(bounds => $bounds, text => 'Rename this file:',
        link => $oldFileName ));

=head3 Fields

=head4 link

    has link => ( is => 'ro', isa => TView );

When a L</TLabel> object is linked to a control, such as an input line, this
field contains a pointer to that control.

=head4 light

    has light => ( is => 'ro', isa => Bool );

=head3 Methods

=head4 new

    my $label = TLabel->new(bounds => $bounds, text => $aText, link => $aLink);

The L</new> constructor creates a new L</TLabel> object with the size and
location specified in $bounds, and assigns to the label the text specified
in $aText.  The last parameter specifies a reference to the control that is
associated with this label.

=head4 draw

    $self->draw();

I<Override>: Never

Draws the L</TLabel> object using the color palette returned by L</getPalette>.

=head4 getPalette

    my $palette = $self->getPalette();

I<Override>: As needed to change colors.

Returns a TPalette object to the C<cpLabel> color palette.  To change the colors
of the L</TLabel> object, override this method to return a TPalette object to 
a different color palette.  The C<cpLabel> color palette is defined to properly
map onto a dialog's color palette.  If, for some reason, you are creating
a label to be placed on top of some other type of object, you will almost
certainly need to override this method.

B<See>: Chapter 13, "More Turbo Vision Features".

=head4 handleEvent

    $self->handleEvent($event);

I<Override>: Never

L</handleEvent> performs the usual event processing by calling
TStaticText->handleEvent to do most of the work.  However,
TLabel->handleEvent intercepts certain mouse down and keyboard shortcut
keys in order to select attached controls.

=head2 TListBox

class

=head3 Turbo Vision Hierarchy:
    TObject
        TView
            TListViewer
                TListBox

=head3 Discussion

Use L</TListBox> to implement list boxes containing collections of
strings.  For example, a dialog box to open a file typically contains a
list of filenames and subdirectories.  To use L</TListBox> you must create and
initialize a collection of strings containing the items to appear in the
list box, and then instantiate and initialize the list box.  While
L</TListBox> is intended for use with string data, you can optionally override
TListBox->getText to process non-string data.  L</TListBox> is derived from
L</TListViewer>, so all of L</TListViewer>'s methods and fields are available to
L</TListBox> objects.

B<See>: L</TListViewer>

=head3 Commonly Used Features

To use the L</TListBox>, you'll call new to create the box, and then 
L</newList> to initialize the list that is displayed.  If you wish to display 
items other than simple strings, you'll need to override L</getText>.

=head3 Example

L</TListBox> is nearly identical to L</TListViewer>except that L</TListBox> does
not support the horizontal scroll bar.  Further, L</TListBox> manages the data
list internally since its designed, by default to have L</getText> return a
string.  To use L</TListBox>, you call TListBox->new in a manner identical to
TListViewer->new (except that there is no horizontal scroll bar).  Next,
you call TListBox->newList to pass a collection of strings to the L</TListBox>
for display.

=head3 Fields

=head4 list

    has list => ( is => 'ro', isa => TCollection );

Holds a reference to the collection of items to display.  Typically this
would be a collection of strings, however, if you store other object
types you will also need to override L</getText>.

B<See>: TListBox->getText

=head3 Methods

=head4 new

    my $listBox = TListBox->new(bounds => $bounds, numCols => $aNumCols, 
        scrollBar => $aScrollBar);

L</new> creates the new L</TListBox> object using the size provided in $bounds,
the number of columns specified by $aNumCols, and links it to the scroll
bar passed as the $aScrollBar parameter, or C<undef> if there is no scroll bar. 
If you do add a scroll bar, you'll need to instantiate the TScroller
object prior to calling L</new>, and you'll need to insert both the list box
and the scroller into the owner's view.  After calling L</new>, you should
call L</newList> to assign the data collection to this list box.

There is no DEMOLISH destructor for L</TListBox> since it is inherited from
L</TListViewer>.  However, you do need to dispose of the contents of List. 
One way to do that is to call L<newList(undef)|/newList> which then disposes of 
the current list and sets L</list> to C<undef>.

B<See>: TListBox->newList

=head4 dataSize

    $int = $self->dataSize();

I<Override>: As needed.

This method is used in conjunction with the TListBox->getData and L</setData>
methods for writing and retrieving L</TListBox> dialog data.  The default
definition of L</dataSize> returns count of L</list> entries + 1 (for 
I<focused>).

B<See>: L</getData>, L</setData>, "The List Box Viewer", in Chapter 12, "Turbo
Vision Dialogs and Events", in the Borland Pascal Developer's Guide.

=head4 getData

    $self->getData(\@rec);

I<Override>: As needed.

L</getData> copies the L</list> and I<focused> (from L</TListViewer>) fields to 
$rec.

B<See>: L</dataSize>, L</setData>, Chapter 12

=head4 getText

    $self->getText(\$dest, $item, $maxLen);

L</getText> is called by the inherited TListViewer->draw method to obtain the
string to draw on the display.  The standard implementation retrieves the
$item'th entry in the L</list> collection as,

    my ( $self, undef, $item, $maxLen ) = @_;
    ...
    for my $dest ( $_[1] ) {
        weaken( $dest = $self->list->at( $item ) );
    }

Its possible to store non-string items in a L</TListBox> type, but to do so
you will need to override L</getText>.

=head4 newList

    $self->newList($aList);

After calling L</new> to create a new L</TListBox> object, you need to link a
data collection to the list box.  You do this by passing the collection as
a parameter to the L</newList> method, which sets L</list> to point to the
collection, and sets the list box I<range> to the collection's I<count> field
and draw's the list box view by calling I</drawView>.  If L</list> is not 
C<undef> when L</newList> is called, L</newList> disposes of the previous 
collection before setting L</list> to the new collection.

=head4 setData

    $self->setData(\@rec);

Copies values from $rec into the L</list> and I<focused> fields and then calls
newList($self->list) in order to reset and display the new list.

B<See>: L</dataSize>, L</getData>

=head2 TListViewer

class

=head3 Turbo Vision Hierarchy:

    TObject
        TView
            TListViewer
                TListBox

=head3 Discussion

Use the L</TListViewer> object type for creating various types of list
box viewers.  List boxes typically contain lists of information, such as
filenames, through which you can scroll and select the desired item. 
Using the L</TListViewer> object, you can create both vertical and horizontal
scroll bars.  Horizontal scroll bars might be used when creating a simple
file viewer for viewing text wider than the list box.

=head3 Commonly Used Features

Call TListViewer->new to create the list viewer.  While the L</TListViewer>
manages the display of the list box it is up to you to provide the data
structures that store the data shown within the box.  You do this by
deriving a new L</TListViewer> object type and overriding the L</getText>
method, which returns a string containing one line of text.  L</getText> has
two parameters, an item index and a maximum length value.  Its up to
L</getText> to retrieve the I<item>'th entry in the list and format it into a
string of no longer than the specified maximum length.  If you insert the
L</TListViewer> into any other L</TGroup> besides TDialog, you will almost
certainly need to override L</getPalette> so that the color mapping works
correctly.

=head3 Example

    # Define TDirList, derived from TListViewer
    package TDirList;
    use TV::Dialogs;
    use parent TListViewer;
    sub getText {
        my ($self, $item, $maxLen) = @_;
        ...
    }
    sub getPalette {
        my $self = shift;
        ...
    }
    sub handleEvent {
        my ($self, $event) = @_;
        ...
    }
    ...
    # Instantiate a scroll bar object
    my $listScroller = TScrollerBar->new(bounds => $barBounds);
    # Instantiate a list viewer and link it to the scroll bar
    my $listViewer = TDirList->new(bounds => $bounds, numCols => 1, 
        hScrollBar => undef, vScrollBar => $listScroller);
    # Insert both objects into the controlling group view
    $self->insert($listScroller);
    $self->insert($listViewer);

=head3 Fields

=head4 hScrollBar

    has hScrollBar => ( is => 'ro', isa => TScrollBar );

Holds the pointer to the horizontal scroll bar object attached to this
list viewer, or is C<undef> if there is no horizontal scroll bar.

=head4 vScrollBar

    has vScrollBar => ( is => 'ro', isa => TScrollBar );

Holds the pointer to the vertical scroll bar object attached to this list
viewer, or is C<undef> if there is no vertical scroll bar.

=head4 numCols

    has numCols => ( is => 'ro', isa => Int );

This stores the number of columns specified for the list viewer and is
initialized with the new constructor.

=head4 topItem

    has topItem => ( is => 'rw', isa => Int );

TopItem specifies the item appearing at the top of the list box viewer. 
TopItem varies from 0 to L</range>-1.

=head4 focused

    has focused => ( is => 'ro', isa => Int );

Focused specifies the item number of the focused or selected item and
ranges from 0 to L</range>-1.  Keyboard navigation keys, scroll bar movements
and mouse clicks and drags all cause the focused item to be updated to
point to the current location of the list box cursor.

=head4 range

    has range => ( is => 'ro', isa => Int );

Holds the total number of items in the list.

B<See>: TListViewer->setRange

=head3 Methods

=head4 new

    my $listViewer = TListViewer->new(bounds => $bounds, numCols => $aNumCols,
        hScrollBar => $aHScrollBar, vScrollBar => $aVScrollBar);

Creates a L</TListViewer> object with the size specified by $bounds and the
number of columns specified by $aNumCols.  If you wish to have scroll bars,
create the TScroller objects before calling new, and then pass objects
to those scroll bars to the $aHScrollBar and $aVScrollBar parameters, for
horizontal or vertical scroll bars, respectively, to link them to the list
box.  Use a value of C<undef> if one or both scroll bars is not defined for
this list box.

=head4 changeBounds

    $self->changeBounds($bounds);

Call L</changeBounds> to resize the list box viewer to the size specified by
the $bounds parameter.

=head4 draw

    $self->draw();

I<Override>: Never.

Draws the list viewer object by calling L</getText> for each of the objects
that could be shown on the screen.

=head4 focusItem

    $self->focusItem($item);

I<Override>: Never.

Use L</focusItem> to make a specific Item in the list box become the focused
item.  This method automatically causes the scroll bar to be adjusted
accordingly.

=head4 getPalette

    my $palette = $self->getPalette();

I<Override>: As needed.

Returns a TPalette object to the color palette for L</TListViewer> objects.  The
default palette, C<cpListViewer> is intended to map directly into a C<cpDialog>
palette.  If you insert the L</TListViewer> object into a view other than the
TDialog, you must override the L</getPalette> method.

B<See>: C<cpListViewer>, C<cpDialog>, Chapter 19, More on Turbo Vision

=head4 getText

    $self->getText(\$dest, $item, $maxLen);

I<Override>: Always

You must implement your own L</getText> method to return a string representing
the data that should appear in the list box at the I<item>'th position. Your
data can be stored in whatever internal representation is appropriate for
your application.  This might include a collection, an array of records, a
linked list, or a simple string array, as shown in this example code:

    # Fetch data item from internal data structure
    my $strBuffer = $myData[$item];
    # Truncate data string if too long
    substr( $strBuffer, $self->maxLen ) = ''
        if length( $strBuffer ) > $self->maxLen;
    $$dest = $strBuffer;

=head4 isSelected

    my $bool = $self->isSelected($item);

Use L</isSelected> to check if a specific item is also the focused item. 
L</isSelected> returns C<TRUE> if the entry specified by $item is currently
selected, C<FALSE> otherwise.

=head4 handleEvent

    $self->handleEvent($event);

I<Override>: As needed.

Performs event processing for the L</TListViewer>, including mouse navigation
and clicking in the list box to select an item, the use of the space bar
to perform keyboard selection, and all keyboard navigation keys (up and
down arrow, PgUp, PgDn, Home, End, etc).  Navigation events that move
through the list automatically cause the associated scroll bars to update
themselves.

B<See>: See Chapter 11, "Turbo Vision Tutorial" in the Borland Pascal
Developer's Guide for an example.

=head4 selectItem

    $self->selectItem($item);

This is intended to be used and overridden by descendants, to make the
Item'th entry in the list selected.  This routine is essentially
equivalent to TListViewer->focusItem.

=head4 setRange

    $self->setRange($aRange);

Sets the L</range> field to $aRange or the number of items in the list and
automatically adjusts the scroll bars, as needed.  If the new range would
put the current L</focused> item value out of range, then L</focused> is reset 
to zero.

B<See>: TListViewer->range

=head4 setState

    $self->setState($aState, $enable);

Basically, this calls TView->setState to set or reset the C<sfOptions> bits in
the TView->state variable.

B<See>: C<sfOptions>, TView->state

=head2 TMenuBar

class

=head3 Turbo Vision Hierarchy

    TObject
        TView
        TMenuView
            TMenuBar
            TMenuBox

=head3 Discussion

The TMenuBar object manages the menu bar across the top of the application
screen.  Most applications merely call the new_TMenuBar subroutine with a
series of nested new_TMenu, new_TSubMenu, newLine and new_TMenuItem subroutine 
calls to create an entire list of pull down menu items.  It's unlikely that you
will use any other TMenuBar methods.

=head3 Example

    sub initMenuBar {
        my ($class, $bounds) = @_;
        $bounds->{b}{y} = $bounds->{a}{y} + 1;
        return new_TMenuBar($bounds,
            new_TSubMenu('~R~un', hcNoContext) +
                new_TMenuItem('~R~un', cmRunProgram, 0, hcNoContext) +
                new_TMenuItem('~E~dit', cmEdit, kbAltE, hcNoContext, 'Alt-E') +
                new_TMenuItem('~V~iew', cmView, kbAltV, hcNoContext, 'Alt-V') +
                new_TMenuItem('~S~hell', cmDOS, kbAltS, hcNoContext, 'Alt-S') +
                new_TMenuItem('E~x~it', cmQuit, kbAltX, hcNoContext, 'Alt-X')
        );
    }

=head3 Fields

None

=head3 Methods

=head4 new

    my $menuBar = TMenuBar->new(bounds => $bounds, menu => $aMenu);

Creates an initializes the menu bar.  See the example above, and also look
at new_TMenu, new_TSubMenu, new_TMenuItem, and newLine subroutines.

=head4 draw

    $self->draw();

Draws the menu bar on the display and highlights the selected item.

=head4 getItemRect

    my $rect = $self->getItemRect($item | undef);

This internal method is used to determine if a mouse click occurred on a
particular menu $item.
